---
layout: post
title: "Development Disappointment Disorder"
date: 2015-12-04 06:57:55 -0500
comments: true
categories: 
---


You just finished this really hard feature. It's taken you a lot longer than
expected, because when it was a lot harder than anyone realized. Not only that,
but the feature wasn't clearly explained, so you spent a lot of time churning on
the actual requirements. Despite all the confusion, iteration, and technical
challenges, you managed to get it working! You look back, and realize how much
you have learned and grown.

You show it off to the product owner. The product owner barely seems to hear
you, their shoulders slump in disappointment. "We are still four weeks behind."

If this sounds familiar, your team is infected with Development Disappointment
Disorder.

It looks different in every team, but Development Disappointment Disorder is
incredibly common. I've seen it manifest in many different ways. It can be the
manager who sets unreasonable deadlines then demands everyone work overtime to
meet it. The project manager who gets angry at every little thing. The
developers who feel they need to point fingers at other groups. The boss who is
never happy no matter what is achieved. The team that feels they "have never had
a successful release".

## Causes

Development Disappointment Disorder is caused by unreasonable expectations.
Someone thinks, hopes, or wishes they can get 100 units of productivity from a
team and codebase that only can sustain 30-40 units. They cannot fathom that
there is a difference between reality and desires. What they want just isn't
possible.

They think that productivity is a people problem, when in reality, software
development work is simply not possible to rush with incurring significant
decreases in quality and stability. The work is so complex, so notoriously
difficult, that every expert in our field agrees with adages like, "adding
developers to a late project makes it later." What adds to the complexity is
many types of development projects are very difficult to predict.

Alternatively, the person still maintains their unreasonable expectations, but
instead of reacting with anger or fear, they get dejected and disappointed.


