---
layout: post
title: "Language Versions"
date: 2015-06-08 10:36
comments: true
categories: 
---

Changing programming tooling can be likened to major and minor versions in
semantic versioning.

Major updates are big, new concepts that have no parallel. Minor updates
probably include features that improve the situation, but do not fundamentally
cause a large shift in thinking or process.

I am not talking about social or financial aspects, like hiring. Hiring is a
complex beast entirely in it's own category. The criteria for choosing a tool
when hiring a few hundred offshore developers is very different for hiring for a
team of three senior developers.

What are some examples of this?

## Minor Benefits

### Perl - PHP - Python - Ruby

Trigger warning! Switching from Perl to PHP for me was a minor change. I was
able to carry over almost all my skills, and for the most part, the differences
were mostly syntactic. Later, when I started using Python, most of my experience
from Perl and PHP was still useful. The libraries had different names, and a few
concepts were different, but on the whole, all three were in a same class of
productivity for me.

More recently, on taking over a small Ruby codebase (scripts, not Rails), I again
found much of my previous experience was still valuable. I can almost guess what
things will be called or how they should be used. I still have to look up
library names and keywords, but on the whole, the languages all provide very
similar workflows. I suspect all four are in the same class of productivity,
with some minor differences here and there. These days I put effort only into
maintaining familiarity with one of these languages, since I am confident I
could quickly relearn any of the other three on demand.

### Java - VB.NET - C#

Moving between Java, VB.NET, and C# feel similarly minor in tangible
productivity. For the most part, all the tooling, expectations, and experience
carries between the three. Obviously the tools are different, and there are a
number of gotchas, but nothing improved or hurt my productivity in any major
way. I doubt any of those three have any one killer feature that cannot be had
in the other. 

## Major Benefits

### Automated Testing

Switching from "run it and see" testing to automated unit and integration
testing was a major change with large productivity benefits. All my experience
to date was still useful, but I needed a whole new set of skills to be able to
apply the techniques. Tools like dependency injection, mocking, TDD, and
continuous integration enabled me to build and revive much larger
systems. Automated testing is a skill that applies well to every language I've
worked in, with benefits that grow increasingly valuable with more complex
systems.

### REPL Development

Repl based development with live hot patching was another major change. It
required a new way of thinking about programming, and with it came an
instantaneous feedback loop. Much like unit testing, it was an entirely new
skill, but opened up a very fast method of building up a system from small
parts. Additionally, it allowed me to rapidly progress in my skills, because I
could instantly see live feedback from my code, without needing to write a whole
test just to see something execute.

### Powerful Static Typing

Moving from a typical static typed language to one with algebraic data types has
been a major change, with major productivity benefits. I have noticed entire
classes of defects disappearing. Additionally, the resulting codebases are much
easier to refactor, which means a faster reaction to a changing domain.

