---
layout: post
title: "Daily Meditation Greatly Improved My Technical Leadership"
date: 2015-12-14 07:50:38 -0500
comments: true
categories: 
- Meta Game
published: false
---

A long time ago, a coworker told me a success story about daily meditation. He
explained how his wife took a class that required an hour of daily meditation
for a whole month. He reported that while she found it uncomfortable, the
effects were astounding. She claimed to feel more relaxed, more focused, and
more "herself". She found new reserves of motivation. She dropped the book she'd
been trying to write for years, and started a business. After that business
failed, she started another, this time successfully.

Immediately convinced, I started by listening to a guided meditation on YouTube
and phone apps. After a couple days of that, I started just doing breathing
exercises while sitting listening to rain sounds. I made a habit of doing it for
about an hour on my lunch break. A few months later, I hated it.

For whatever reason, after each session I would feel very uncomfortable. I would
be confronted with emotions that made me feel worthless and embarrassed. My mind
was bringing forward all these painful memories and feelings. Over time, I
started to dread the lunch break.

All at once, I had a profound understanding. I realized what was causing these
emotions. I was in the middle of a major push to guide our team to adopt a new
programming language. I saw that I'd been acting in ways that were completely
ineffective. My ego and self-worth were so tied into this campaign to change
languages that I wasn't able to hear any criticism. When people pointed out
legitimate concerns or weaknesses, I was getting embarrassed and taking it as
personal failures.

From the very beginning my idea was poorly executed. After researching the new
technology for a long time, I felt like I saw a place where it could solve some
of our needs. Instead of carefully writing out a proposal, I "half-jokingly"
brought it up whenever I could. When the listeners didn't immediately react
positively, I quickly retracted the idea, "just kidding". Over weeks I dropped
not-so-subtle hints, "oh, this would be better with...", or, "well, you wouldn't
have this problem if...". Instead of convincing anyone of anything, I just
broadcasted to everyone how insecure I felt about the issue. Everyone could
clearly see that I cared, but I was too afraid to put myself out there and make
a serious suggestion. For months nothing changed, and I felt more and more
bitter that "my idea" wasn't being listened to. In reality, I hadn't even made a
serious suggestion yet!

Eventually, the people around me started to listen and research the new
language. They agreed it really did solve a need we had. After a while, enough
people got on board that we started using it more. Even then, I held tightly to
"my idea", afraid that it would prove to be a failure. When someone ran into
issues, I would get defensive. While never outright rude, I clearly took any
criticism, no matter legitimate, as personal. I'd tightly coupled my ego to my
ideas.

After a few months of meditating, this idea rocked my world. My negative
emotions came from a realization that my actions were not in line with my
values. I don't want my self-worth to be tied to a simple tool. No tool is worth
it. Every tool fails. I'd sold myself short, lowered my self-worth to that of a
simple tool. This completely blocked my ability to be an effective technical
leader.

I couldn't hear criticism of my suggestions without getting defensive, so I
couldn't think critically. I couldn't help work out solutions, because that
would mean admitting I was wrong. Every side comment or momentary struggle felt
like a catastrophe.

After realizing this, I decided to write up what I'd learned. I wanted to always
be able to look back and remember. I don't want to make mistakes twice, and
certainly not one of this magnitude.




