---
layout: post
title: "Design A Compassionate Interview"
date: 2015-11-10 17:01:58 -0500
comments: true
categories: 
- Meta Game
published: true
---

After my post [Interview Humiliation](http://deliberate-software.com/on-defeat/), a number of
people have asked me how I interview compassionately. I certainly do not claim
to be an expert at the topic, but I do strive to make my interviews as
stress-free and respectful as possible.

Any good interview process needs to start with good goals. Without goals, you
will just do things without any reason. By definition, you will have an average
interview process with average results. I'll explain my goals, then explain my
thought process that led to a concrete process. You can make your goals, then
see how they align with your current process.

### My Goals

  * Candidate should learn as much as possible about working here, good and bad
  * Respect candidate's time
  * Make the candidate comfortable
  * The process must not favor anyone by race, gender, or religion
  * Under-skilled candidates should feel no shame
  * Both passing and failing candidates should leave wishing they could work here
  * We should render the same decision if interview is repeated
  * A "bad day" shouldn't affect the decision
  * Candidate should feel we are working "side-by-side" instead of "face-to-face"

## My Ideal Candidate

Philosophically, I want to hire for high-level skills. Skills like fast
learning, strategic thinking, and emotional intelligence. Given the dynamic
nature of the world, I care more about "ability to grow" than "current skills".

I do not care about any question that could be easily be answered by Google. If
an internet search can easily answer the question, it is pointless to care if
the human in front of me happens to know it. Given the search revolution of the
last decade, the value of memorized facts falls to almost zero. Memorization of
any substantial amount of information about today's tech world is outside the
abilities of most humans.

I also do not care about skills like whiteboard coding, puzzle questions, or
anything that can be "scored". I'd love to believe that a perfect scoring system
can be invented. Unfortunately, developer productivity needs to be solved first.
Without developer productivity, no accurate scoring system can be made. Counting
bugs, features, correct answers, etc, are all proxies that poorly represent
actually productivity. If those actually worked, why don't we use them for
raises, bonuses, and reviews? Because. They. Do. Not. Work.

## Our Process

On reflection of our goals and desired candidate, we came up with the following
process:

* Phone Screen

  We pair program over the internet using a shared programming environment
  called [Cloud9](c9.io). We have projects set up for Java, Javascript, Python,
  Ruby, and C#. The candidate may choose their desired language. We then pair
  program using Test Driven Development to build out a simple programming
  exercise. The candidate may entirely verbally "navigate", while one of our
  programmers entirely "drives" and types out the code. This is acceptable. The
  ideal candidate will be able to demonstrate comfort with programming concepts
  and abstraction design.

  Most programmers will not have seen Test Driven Development, and as such will
  have to "learn" it while we work on the project. This is acceptable. If the
  candidate has never seen any of those languages, Google or asking the
  interview is totally fair game, and does not count against them.

  The phone screen is under an hour, with 30 minutes for the pair programming,
  and any remaining time for questions about our office. We let them drive the
  second half of the interview, asking us questions about what our team and
  process is like. We attempt to answer clearly and honestly, both good and bad.

  To "level-set" our expectations, we had several of our developers at different
  levels perform the interview live in front of the team. We made them use
  various languages and exercises they had never seen before. This
  "level-setting" helped us to see how known good candidates perform when way
  out of their element. 

* In-Person

    

In an experienced candidate, I want to see a past filled with mistakes and
lessons learned.



