---
layout: post
title: "Managing Self-Organizaing Teams"
date: 2015-11-24 07:39:03 -0500
comments: true
categories: 
- Meta Game
published: false
---

(All these great ideas, but no one is listening? Check out my
book: [Convincing Coworkers](https://leanpub.com/convincingcoworkers))

Self organizing teams are a complex topic. I believe they have very clear pros
and cons. At my work, I manage a self organizing team which has a unique set of
expectations. 

### Individual Expectations

Each individual is expected to work a strict 40 hour week. You should
confidently leave at eight hours sharp. Overtime in this office is not
considered a virtue. The well researched costs end up losing our business time
and money over the long term. Overtime for the sake of "signaling to management"
is disapproved and not rewarded. You are expected to come in and work as hard as
you can such that you are "done" at the end of an eight hour day and could
perform no additional effort. In the rare circumstances that overtime is
required, it will be clearly stated and have clearly defined goals: e.g. solving
a critical and time-sensitive customer issue. Your manager should know and
approve of the overtime. In these circumstances it is expected that you will
come in later to make up for it unless otherwise stated.

In all circumstances, you are expected to be responsible for the development
team. If someone is late consistently, has poor hygiene, or is not performing
their duties sufficiently, you are expected to bring it up to them privately. If
they continue, bring it up in a retrospective or let their manager know. If you
see someone doing anything illegal or performing harassment, immediately let
their manager know. Common sense should dictate when it is a "business issue" or
a "legality issue".

Each developer shares the responsibility for the quality of the entire code base
of the office. Since teams move and reform fluidly, you might be maintaining a
new code base at any time. Behaving as a good citizen of this office means
always doing everything possible to have your code ready to hand off at a
moments notice. Long branches, commented out code, failing tests, and broken
builds all should be dealt with immediately as the highest priority. Refactoring
projects should be completed by the individual who "champions" it. Undertaking a
multi-session refactoring is acceptable, but should have clearly stated goals
and end state.

The individual is expected to mentor every other developer in all areas
technical, social, and collaborative. No one is exempt from the duty of gently
correcting another who is incorrect. Everyone is expected to take correction or
suggestions seriously, regardless of their source. If the most junior developer
corrects the most senior, the most senior is expected to listen and take it as
seriously as possible.

You are expected to behave in a manner fitting for a professional. Profanity,
coarse joking, or sexual innuendo are commonly considered to be inappropriate
behavior for an American professional, and as such should not be tolerated. The
individual is expected to call out their teammates for such behavior with a firm
comment immediately, e.g. "that is inappropriate for a professional."

Retrospectives are mandatory, as they are the primary way for the team to
improve and communicate issues. If you do not approve of the format or the
frequency, convince everyone to make a change.

Team formation and working agreements are decided on by the team, with the whole
development staff providing insight. No new team may form without the consent of
the development staff at large. The team's working agreements must adhere to the
common goals of information sharing, training, high code quality, low defect
rates, automated regression, and regular automated builds and deployment. Pair
programming is not mandatory by a team, but can be replaced with alternate
working agreements that are approved by the larger technical staff.

### Development Manager Expectations

Primarily, the development manager is charged with ensuring a culture that
attracts and enriches high quality talent. This can be accomplished though team
empowerment, regular mentoring, and conflict resolution. Their goal is to build
a team of individuals and trust them to perform with excellence.

The manager should be consistently watching for cultural "dividers" who cause
the teams to excessively fight or grow negative. These dividers should be given
feedback that causes them to improve or move along. Dividers often cause a toxic
culture to form, which destroys morale.

Development managers are the last stop when the team is unable to correct the
behavior of an individual. They are to freely allow teams to reorganize and
develop working agreements as long as they are in line with meeting the
requirements of the business with high quality code.

The development manager holds no technical authority over the development staff,
nor handles prioritization and assignment of work. The work priorities are to be
handled by the business experts. Work is assigned to the team that forms around
it, not an individual.

Additionally development managers interact with recruiters and coordinate HR
related functions and documentation.




(All these great ideas, but no one is listening? Check out my
book: [Convincing Coworkers](https://leanpub.com/convincingcoworkers))
