---
layout: post
title: "On Defeat"
date: 2015-05-02 19:01
comments: true
categories: 
- Meta Game
published: false
---

One day, I went into an interview, and I was humiliated.

(This is the third time I've tried to write this post.)

To set the stage, you have to realize that I used to think very highly of
myself. This was early on in the TDD craze, and I was one of the best I knew at
it. I knew interfaces, classes, mocking frameworks, and best practices. I'd
been taught all the tricks from some very smart people, and my confidence was
high. Not only that, but I'd just finished the restoration of an abandoned
legacy codebase to a bug-free state completely on my own.

I'd shipped Java, PHP, Perl, and VB.NET, and I hadn't been programming more than
a couple years. My first job, they'd made me a team lead over some very senior developers
within a year my hire date. I was learning Clojure and Common Lisp, and had just
shipped an Android game I made entirely alone (including the 2D physics engine).

I thought I was incredible. Yet, due to an overwhelming sense of Imposter
Syndrome, I keenly knew that there were things I didn't know, so I was waking up
first thing in the morning, studying the Algorithm Design Manual before going to
work.

At the time, I did not enjoy my job. I felt like my vast talents were wasted,
and I was determined to get what my talents deserved. My arrogance pushed me
both to unhappiness where I was, but also to tirelessly struggle to be better
than everyone else around me.

Enter Company A.

I flew through the phone screen "this is the best phone screen we've seen!" Of
course it is. "Your resume is very impressive." Oh, I know!

I get to the on-site interview.

First, they tell me to get there the wrong time. Second, since I hadn't been
thoughtful enough to ask, I wore a suit. Third, I was asked to present a project
I'd worked on, and I picked my recently shipped game. I walk into a room 
